---
layout: reveal
title: "10. Paradigmen: Clifford Geertz"
author: "Nathan Gibson"
session: 10
tags: [10,slides]
image: rooster.jpg
parallaxBackgroundImage: 'assets/img/rooster.jpg'
---

# Theorien und Methoden der Religionswissenschaft

### Clifford Geertz: Interpretative Theorie durch „Thick Description"

Sommersemester 2024  
Prof. Dr. Catherina Wenzel & Prof. Dr. Nathan Gibson

## Mitteilungen

Keine Vorlesung am 01.07.

## Rückblick: Victor & Edith Turner



## Heutiges Lernziel

"Thick Description" als ein ethnographischer Ansatz erfassen.

## Intro

Welche _Funktionen_ hat diese Vorlesung?
{: .fragment} 

Welche _Bedeutungen_ hat diese Vorlesung?
{: .fragment}

## Gliederung

- Clifford Geertz (1926-2006): Leben & Karriere
- Teilnehmende Beobachtung und Thick Description
- Religion, thickly described

## 1. Leben 

<iframe width="100%" height ="100%" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/3dQDx3axrDs?si=i6qsI_yoNzJtC4dL&amp;start=36" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## 1. Leben

- 1956 Promotion (Harvard University)
- 1960 University of Chicago
- 1960–1963 Bücher über Feldforschung in Indonesien
- 1968 _Islam Observed_ (Indonesien und Marokko)
- 1970 Institute for Advanced Study Princeton
- 1973 _The Interpretation of Cultures_ 

## 2. Teilnehmende Beobachtung und Thick Description

## Teilnehmende Beobachtung: Hintergrund

- Popularisiert von Bronisław Malinowski (1884-1942)
- Vorarbeit u.a. von Bateson und Mead
- Geertz: Situation in Bali

## Was sind die Ergebnisse von teilnehmender Beobachtung?

Analyse? Beschreibung? Auf welche Art und Weise?

## Thick Description (Dichte Beschreibung)

> (1973, 5) Believing, with Max Weber, that man is an animal suspended in webs of significance he himself has spun, I take culture to be those webs, and the analysis of it to be therefore not an experimental science in search of law but an interpretive one in search of meaning.

## Thick Description (Dichte Beschreibung)

> (1973, 9–10) Analysis, then, is sorting out the structures of signification ... Doing ethnography is like trying to read (in the sense of "construct a reading of') a manuscript-foreign, faded, full of ellipses, incoherencies, suspicious emendations, and tendentious commentaries ...

## Thick Description (Dichte Beschreibung)

> (1973, 10) Culture, this acted document, thus is public ... Though ideational, it does not exist in someone's head; though unphysical, it is not an occult entity.

## Thick Description (Dichte Beschreibung)

"Thin" vs. "thick" description (nach Gilbert Ryle): The difference between a "twitch" and a "wink"

## Thick Description Beispiel: Hahnenkampf

[Geertz, Clifford. »Deep Play«: Bemerkungen zum balinesischen Hahnenkampf. In Dichte Beschreibung. Beiträge zum Verstehen kultureller Systeme, translated by Brigitte Luchesi, 202–60. Suhrkamp-Taschenbuch Wissenschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 2003.](https://olat-ce.server.uni-frankfurt.de/olat/auth/RepositoryEntry/21098758150/CourseNode/93668888136198/10-Geertz+-+2003+-+%C2%BBDeep+Play%C2%AB+Bemerkungen+zum+balinesischen+Hahnenk.pdf)

## Was gehört zu Thick Description

1. Accurately describes and interprets within context
2. Captures thoughts, emotions, and webs of social interaction
3. Assigns motivations and intentions
4. Reader experiences sense of verisimilitude as they read (they feel they are there)
5. Leads to thick interpretation and thick meaning (of findings)

nach Ponteretto (2006), zusammengefasst von [Leslie Reich, "Thick Description"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMZbZbQNZe4&list=PLnGravZsYAxogmD1HSKlDvZ8CGRby6ih0&index=8)
 
## 3. Religion, thickly described

> (1966, 4) [Religion is] [1] a system of symbols which acts to [2] establish powerful, pervasive, and long-lasting moods and motivations in men by [3] formulating conceptions of a general order of existence and [4] clothing these conceptions with such an aura of factuality that [5] the moods and motivations seem uniquely realistic. 

## 3. Religion, thickly described

Diskussion: was würden Sie erforschen und versuchen zu beschreiben?

## Vorschau

